> 来源: arxiv.org
> 原URL: https://arxiv.org/html/2508.08396v1
> 收集时间: 2026-05-01

# XDMA: A Distributed, Extensible DMA Architecture for Layout-Flexible Data Movements in Heterogeneous Multi-Accelerator SoCs



XDMA: A Distributed, Extensible DMA Architecture for Layout-Flexible Data Movements in Heterogeneous Multi-Accelerator SoCs

I Introduction

II XDMA Architecture

II-A XDMA Orchestration
II-B XDMA Controller
II-C XDMA Datapath

III XDMA Evaluation

III-A System Environment Setup
III-B Matrix Layout Transformation
III-C Real Workload Evaluation on FPGA
III-D Area and Power Evaluation

IV Conclusion

##
XDMA: A Distributed, Extensible DMA Architecture for Layout-Flexible Data Movements in Heterogeneous Multi-Accelerator SoCs

Fanchen Kong∗, Yunhao Deng∗, Xiaoling Yi, Ryan Antonio, Marian Verhelst

MICAS-ESAT, KU Leuven, Belgium
{fanchen.kong, yunhao.deng, xiaoling.yi, ryan.antonio, marian.verhelst}@esat.kuleuven.be

(November 2025)

## Abstract

As modern AI workloads increasingly rely on heterogeneous accelerators, ensuring high-bandwidth and layout-flexible data movements between accelerator memories has become a pressing challenge. Direct Memory Access (DMA) engines promise high bandwidth utilization for data movements but are typically optimal only for contiguous memory access, thus requiring additional software loops for data layout transformations. This, in turn, leads to excessive control overhead and underutilized on-chip interconnects. To overcome this inefficiency, we present XDMA, a distributed and extensible DMA architecture that enables layout-flexible data movements with high link utilization. We introduce three key innovations: (1) a data streaming engine as XDMA Frontend, replacing software address generators with hardware ones; (2) a distributed DMA architecture that maximizes link utilization and separates configuration from data transfer; (3) flexible plugins for XDMA enabling on-the-fly data manipulation during data transfers. XDMA demonstrates up to 151.2×\times/8.2×\times higher link utilization than software-based implementations in synthetic workloads and achieves 2.3×\times average speedup over accelerators with SoTA DMA in real-world applications. Our design incurs &lt;&lt;2% area overhead over SoTA DMA solutions while consuming 17% of system power. XDMA proves that co-optimizing memory access, layout transformation, and interconnect protocols is key to unlocking heterogeneous multi-accelerator SoC performance.

## Index Terms:

DMA, Multicore SoC, Heterogeneous System

††footnotetext: This project has been partly funded by the European Research Council (ERC) under grant agreement No. 101088865, the European Union’s Horizon 2020 program (CONVOLVE) under grant agreement No. 101070374, the Flanders AI Research Program, and KU Leuven.
**footnotetext: Both authors contributed equally to this research.

##
I Introduction

The growing demand for compute performance and advances in silicon technology have driven the integration of multiple heterogeneous accelerators into single Systems-on-Chip (SoCs)[1, 2] to achieve higher performance and energy efficiency in compute-intensive tasks. These accelerators include Generalized Matrix-Matrix Multiplication (GeMM) accelerators [3], In-Memory Computing (IMC)[4],
accelerators for sparse data[5], and security coprocessors[6]. To achieve high energy efficiency and avoid stalls, these accelerators often employ dedicated memory subsystems. In practice, however, while data access between memory subsystems and accelerators is heavily optimized, the data exchange across different accelerators is overlooked, limiting the overall performance of heterogeneous SoCs. Copying data across heterogeneous accelerators presents two interrelated challenges: (1) Modern workloads are increasingly memory-bounded due to a lack of data reuse (2) The in-memory data layout must align with the accelerators’ diverse access patterns,
such as a tiled layout for GeMM, a row-major layout for SIMD, etc. Suboptimal layouts can increase inference latency up to 100×\times compared to optimal accelerator-tailored formats[7] because explicit data layout transformations are costly in terms of energy and latency.

Direct Memory Access (DMA) engines are key components for achieving high-bandwidth data movements between memories. However, traditional DMAs can only copy contiguous data sequences. Thus, layout transformation is only achievable through software control loops, which incurs significant control overhead. A possible mitigation involves offloading layout transformations to standalone accelerators, allowing DMAs to retain burst transfers. However, this approach introduces additional latency and energy costs for intermediate data, undermining the benefits of accelerator specialization. To overcome this inefficiency, we propose XDMA111XDMA Frontend is open-sourced as one component in SNAX, while XDMA Backend is open-sourced separately.  (the operating mechanism is shown in Fig. 1), an extensible DMA architecture that unifies high-utilization memory transfers and efficient data layout transformation.

Figure 1: XDMA moves data in a multi-accelerator SoC

The main contributions of this work are:

•

We design a distributed DMA architecture with decoupled read/write ports, communicating through a two-phase circuit-switched protocol, bypassing AXI limitations to sustain high link utilization.

•

We replace software-managed loops by a hardware solution, enabling N-dimensional affine address generation with minimal bandwidth penalties.

•

We design standardized and flexible XDMA plugins to support on-the-fly compute and layout transformation.

•

We validate XDMA using synthetic and real workloads, achieving 8.2×\times to 151.2×\times improvements vs. software loop baselines, and on average 2.7×\times higher link utilization vs. accelerator+DMA design. XDMA incurs less than 2% area overhead compared to SoTA DMA, 17% of system energy.

Table I compares the XDMA architecture with SoTA DMAs from academia and industry.

Architecture
Technology
Address Gen
Data Access
Comp-while-transfer
Open-Sourced

HyperDMA[8]

Distributed
RTL
ND
Direct (Coarse-grained)
None
No

ESP DMA[1]

Monolithic
FPGA
1D
Through interconnect
None
Yes

Gemmini DMA[9]

Monolithic
FPGA, Silicon
2D
Through interconnect
Transpose, Scaling
Yes

IDMA[10]

Monolithic
FPGA, Silicon
Optional ND
Through interconnect
In-stream Acc. port
Yes

AMD DMA v7.1[11]

Monolithic
FPGA
Optional 2D
Through interconnect
None
No

TI EDMA3[12]

Monolithic
Silicon
3D
Through interconnect
None
No

XDMA
Distributed
FPGA, Silicon
ND
Direct (Fine-grained)
Flexible Plugins
Yes

TABLE I: Comparison between XDMA and SoTA DMA architectures

##
II XDMA Architecture

Figure 2: The architecture of XDMA (a) and three selected sub-modules (b, c, d)

Parameters
Symbol
Parameters
Symbol

Mem. Base Addr.
A​d​d​rM​e​mAddr_{Mem}
Mem. Width
WBW_{B}

Mem. Size
S​i​z​eM​e​mSize_{Mem}
AXI Width
WA​X​IW_{AXI}

Src./Dst. Buf. Depth
DB​u​f,s​r​c/d​s​tD_{Buf,src/dst}
Src./Dst. Dim.
D​i​ms​r​c/d​s​tDim_{src/dst}

Src./Dst. #Channel
NC,s​r​c/d​s​tN_{C,src/dst}
Src./Dst. Ext. List
E​x​ts​r​c/d​s​tExt_{src/dst}

TABLE II: Design-time parameters of XDMA

XDMA proposes a novel decentralized DMA architecture. Fig. 2(a) shows the hardware hierarchy of XDMA. The XDMA Controller (§II-B) receives instructions and forwards configurations to local or remote XDMA unit. The XDMA Datapath (§II-C) includes three building blocks: (1)
The Frontend interfaces with the memory, offering flexible memory accesses; (2) The Plugin provides a standardized interface for integrating customized modules that manipulate data during transfers; (3) The Backend encapsulates data into AXI frames and manages the tunnel between two half-XDMAs units. XDMA’s parameterized design enables easy integration into various SoCs. Table II details XDMA ’s design-time parameters.

##
II-A XDMA Orchestration

Figure 3: The XDMA orchestration for read and write requests

The coordination between two half XDMAs consists of a two-phase flow following the circuit switching principle, as depicted in Fig. 3: first, a CFG transfer phase, where transaction CFG are forwarded to the remote counterpart, and then a Data transfer phase in which the link is fully occupied by data.
XDMA employs a distributed architecture where each unit features both master and slave ports, distinguished from the conventional DMAs that only use master ports. This enables XDMA to encapsulate all transfers into AXI write request, simplifying the design while maintaining full-duplex transfer capability. Although CFG and Data transactions share the AW/W channel, deadlock will not occur as all transactions are one-to-one, and no dependency between different XDMA transactions. Furthermore, XDMA can autonomously arbitrate the task based on the FIFO principle if contention happens.

##
II-B XDMA Controller

XDMA Controller (Fig. 2(b)) converts the offloaded CSR instruction into XDMACfg structures to describe one XDMA task. Then, two configuration routers route the XDMACfg to XDMA that attached to the correct memory region. Two routers forward the CFG to remote side through the AXI interconnect if this task needs the collaboration of two XDMA. Finally, Src. and Dst. configurations arrive at the Task FIFO and In-order Dispatch unit, which monitors the status of the Frontend, and dispatches a new task when the previous one is finished.

##
II-C XDMA Datapath

The XDMA Frontend (shown in Fig. 2(b)) accesses local memories in an N-D affine pattern and prefetches the data for the XDMA Backend. We utilize data streaming engines designed for dataflow accelerators [13], consisting of a D​i​mDim-dimensional address generator and a Db​u​fD_{buf}-depth data buffer. The address generator effectively offloads the address computation tasks from the processor, and the data buffer mitigates potential bank conflicts during transformation of diverse data layouts.

The XDMA Backend (Fig. 2(d)) acts as the compatibility layer between the Frontend and the AXI4 interconnect. It establishes virtual tunnels between two XDMAs units on top of the AXI protocol by mapping signals (cfg, data, grant, finish) to independent MMIO addresses and initiate write requests to counterpart’s MMIOs. Each Backend is both AXI Master and Slave, so every two pairs can collaborate independently.

XDMA enables on-the-fly data manipulation during local and remote data transfers through custom Plugins that can be inserted within the XDMA Frontend. Two Plugin Hosts, one post-reader and one pre-writer, share a uniform architecture, as depicted in Fig. 2(c). One or more plugins can be cascaded and each plugin can have its own control bit vectors.

##
III XDMA Evaluation

We evaluate the performance of XDMA in a multi-accelerator SoC. We first analyze the ability of XDMA to efficiently transform data layouts (§III-B). To validate XDMA’s adaptability to real workloads, we subsequently prototype this XDMA-attached SoC on the AMD Versal™ VPK180 FPGA and demonstrate its efficacy in KV-cache prefill/load workloads for the DeepSeek-V3[14] LLM (§III-C). Finally, we synthesize the design into an ASIC implementation to obtain the area and power results (§III-D).
We vary Db​u​f,s​r​c/d​s​tD_{buf,src/dst}, a key design-time parameter affecting performance-area trade-offs, from 3 to 9, to showcase how this parameter impacts the XDMA design.

##
III-A System Environment Setup

We group a 4MB, 32-bank, 64-bit-per-bank memory, two RV32I cores[15], an accelerator, and an XDMA into an accelerator cluster. Since this paper does not focus on evaluating accelerator’s performance, we attach a basic 8×\times8×\times8 GeMM mainly for the area estimation. We setup a dual-cluster SoC derived from Occamy[16] to evaluate XDMAs, the width of AXI interconnect is configured as 512 bits. DataMaestro[13] is chosen as the data streaming engine of XDMA. Our baselines are the iDMA[10] and Gemmini’s built-in DMA[9], which can represent SoTA general-purpose DMA and workload-optimal DMA respectively.

All RTL simulations are conducted using Verilator. Silicon synthesis is performed using Synopsys Design Compiler® with GF 22nm FDX™ technology at 1GHz 0.8V. Power consumption is analyzed using the synthesized netlist and gate-level switching activity via Synopsys PrimeTime®.

##
III-B Matrix Layout Transformation

We compare the average link utilization of various 4D data layout transformation and data copy workloads across different HW/SW setups. We select four data layouts: MN, MNM8N8, MNM8N16 and MNM8N32, which is the optimal data layout for 2D/3D GeMM array. The matrix size is chosen from 32×\times32 to 512×\times512. Six different HW/SW setups are evaluated as shown in Fig. 4, resulting in total 768 test points.

The effective BW of each test is calculated by the total data volume transferred divided by the measured execution time. The link utilization is then calculated by dividing the effective BW by the theoretical BW. For software-managed DMA setups (①,②), the address calculations occur before data movement.

Figure 4: The average link utilization for the 4D matrix reshape: ① 2D software control loop + 2D iDMA copy, ② 2D software control loop + 2D Gemmini DMA copy, ③ iDMA copy + dedicated 4D layout transformation accelerator, and ④⑤⑥ 4D XDMA with Db​u​f,s​r​c/d​s​t=3,5,9D_{buf,src/dst}=3,5,9 (XDMA3/5/9)

The results show that XDMA9 (⑥) achieves the highest and most stable link utilization. All hardware-accelerated solutions (③-⑥) outperform software-loop approaches (①, ②) by a wide margin, confirming our claim in §I that software control can create performance bottlenecks. Among software-managed approaches, the Gemmini[9] DMA outperforms the iDMA[10] due to the higher I/O performance of the Rocket core, reducing control overhead. The solution ③ improves on the former two, but incurs additional memory overheads due to intermediate results. In general, XDMA9 (⑥) exceeds SoTA solutions (①②③) by 151.2×\times/8.2×\times/2.4×\times on average, respectively.

When comparing XDMA with different Db​u​fD_{buf} (④-⑥), XDMA9 (⑥) outperforms XDMA3 and XDMA5 by 1.7×\times and 1.1×\times on average. We observe higher variations for the setups with the smaller Db​u​fD_{buf} because the smaller buffer cannot consistently prevent stalls caused by bank conflicts. All remaining tests are conducted on XDMA9 for maximum performance.

##
III-C Real Workload Evaluation on FPGA

We implement the evaluating clusters on a VPK180 FPGA. Fig. 5 details the annotated FPGA floorplan, operating frequency, and resource utilization for an 8×\times8×\times8 GeMM accelerator cluster featuring with XDMA, showing that XDMA introduces approximately 8% area overhead.

Next, we benchmark cross-cluster data copy performance offered by XDMA using Deepseek-v3’s KV-cache matrix shape of
8192×\times512 with Batch=1, representing personal-use scenarios. Evaluated workloads include: (1) Prefill stage: a GeMM accelerator in cluster 1 (Optimal layout: MNM8N8) computes the KV cache, followed by an RMSNorm on a SIMD accelerator in cluster 2 (Optimal layout: MN). Finally, the RMSNormed data is stored to another cluster in the MNM8N8 layout; (2) Load stage: The KV-cache data is after a first GeMM in cluster 1, transferred and simultaneously transposed to cluster 2 for transformer operations. Table III shows that the workloads executing on the XDMA experience a 2.3×\times latency improvement compared with the baseline setup (iDMA+Accelerator).

Experiment
Shape
I/O Layout
Operation
#CC/Acc. ratio

Prefill 1
2048×\times512
MNM8N8/MN
Reshape
38542 / 2.34×\times

Prefill 2
2048×\times512
MN/MNM8N8
Reshape
42934 / 2.60×\times

Load 1
2048×\times512
MNM8N8
Transpose
37509 / 2.28×\times

Load 2
4096×\times512
MNM8N8
Transpose
74884 / 2.28×\times

Load 3
8192×\times512
MNM8N8
Transpose
149639 / 2.28×\times

TABLE III: KV-Cache Prefill/Load evaluation of XDMA

Platform

Versal™ VPK180

Frequency
100MHz

LUTs Total
268k

Regs Total
67k

LUTs GeMM
150k (56.0%)

Regs GeMM
18k (26.9%)

LUTs iDMA
8k (2.9%)

Regs iDMA
8.8k (13.1%)

LUTs XDMA9
20.5k (7.6%)

Regs XDMA9
5.9k (8.8%)

Figure 5: The FPGA result of the accelerator cluster with XDMA

##
III-D Area and Power Evaluation

Finally, we synthesize the cluster with 8×\times8×\times8 GeMM and an XDMA (with a reduced memory size of 128kB) into an ASIC implementation. XDMA occupies 6.7% of the accelerator cluster’s area and consumes 17% of the total cluster power (Fig. 6) when executing 1D memory copy task.

Figure 6: Area and power decomposition of XDMA evaluation cluster: (1)(2) The area breakdown; (3)(4) The power breakdown when data being copied from cluster 0 to cluster 1.

##
IV Conclusion

In this paper, we present XDMA, a distributed and extensible DMA architecture designed for efficient memory layout transformations across heterogeneous accelerators. XDMA offers 8.2×\times-151.2×\times improvements over the SW-managed solutions in non-contiguous data copy tasks. We also present implementation results on both FPGA and silicon technology. XDMA incurs less than 2% area overhead compared to iDMA and consumes 17% of the total power of the accelerator cluster.

## References

[1]

M. C. Dos Santos et al., “14.5 a 12nm linux-smp-capable risc-v soc with 14 accelerator types, distributed hardware power management and flexible noc-based data orchestration,” in 2024 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC), vol. 67. IEEE, 2024, pp. 262–264.

[2]

V. Schmulbach et al., “Nectar and rasoc: Tale of two class socs for language model interference and robotics in intel 16,” in 2024 IEEE Hot Chips 36 Symposium (HCS). IEEE Computer Society, 2024, pp. 1–1.

[3]

H. Liao et al., “Davinci: A scalable architecture for neural network computing,” in 2019 IEEE Hot Chips 31 Symposium (HCS). IEEE Computer Society, 2019, pp. 1–44.

[4]

P. A. Hager et al., “11.3 metis aipu: A 12nm 15tops/w 209.6 tops soc for cost-and energy-efficient inference at the edge,” in 2024 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC), vol. 67. IEEE, 2024, pp. 212–214.

[5]

M. Shi et al., “Bitwave: Exploiting column-based bit-level sparsity for deep learning acceleration,” in 2024 IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), 2024, pp. 732–746.

[6]

A. Ghosh et al., “A 334 μ\muw 0.158 mm 2 asic for post-quantum key-encapsulation mechanism saber with low-latency striding toom–cook multiplication,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 58, no. 8, pp. 2383–2398, 2023.

[7]

J. Tong et al., “Feather: A reconfigurable accelerator with data reordering support for low-cost on-chip dataflow switching,” in 2024 ACM/IEEE 51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA). IEEE, 2024, pp. 198–214.

[8]

M. Peng et al., “Hyperdma: Enhancing high-performance computing and ai workflows with advanced data transfer capabilities,” in 2024 9th International Conference on Integrated Circuits and Microsystems (ICICM). IEEE, 2024, pp. 636–644.

[9]

H. Genc et al., “Gemmini: Enabling systematic deep-learning architecture evaluation via full-stack integration,” in 2021 58th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC). IEEE, 2021, pp. 769–774.

[10]

T. Benz et al., “A high-performance, energy-efficient modular dma engine architecture,” IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 73, no. 1, pp. 263–277, 2023.

[11]

A. Xilinx, “Axi dma logicore ip product guide,” 2022.

[12]

T. I, “Enhanced direct memory access (edma3) controller,” 2015.

[13]

X. Yi et al., “Datamaestro: A versatile and efficient data streaming engine bringing decoupled memory access to dataflow accelerators,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.14091, 2025.

[14]

A. Liu et al., “Deepseek-v3 technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19437, 2024.

[15]

F. Zaruba et al., “Snitch: A tiny pseudo dual-issue processor for area and energy efficient execution of floating-point intensive workloads,” IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 70, no. 11, pp. 1845–1860, 2020.

[16]

G. Paulin et al., “Occamy: A 432-core 28.1 dp-gflop/s/w 83% fpu utilization dual-chiplet, dual-hbm2e risc-v-based accelerator for stencil and sparse linear algebra computations with 8-to-64-bit floating-point support in 12nm finfet,” in 2024 IEEE Symposium on VLSI Technology and Circuits (VLSI Technology and Circuits). IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–2.

Generated  on Mon Aug 11 18:18:39 2025 by LaTeXML

